In this segment I'm going to introduce
another score that's used for
making the matches of
documents to a query.
And that is to make use of this
notion of document frequency.
In particular we always use it in reverse,
so
it's normally referred to as inverse
document frequency weighting.
The idea behind making use of
document frequency is that
rare terms are more informative
than frequent terms.
So, if you remember early on
we talked about stop words.
Which was words like the, and to, and of.
And so the idea that was that these words
were so common so semantically empty that
we didn't have to include them in our
information retrieval system at all.
They have no effect on how good
a match a document was to a query.
Well, that's maybe not quite true.
But there's some truth in it in particular
it seems like in general very common words
aren't very determined of the matching
of a document in a query.
Where as rare words are more important.
So you consider a term in the query
that is very rare in the collection
perhaps something like arachnocentric.
Well, if someone had typed
that word into their query and
we can find a document that
contains the word arachnocentric,
it's very likely to be a document that
the user would be interested in seeing.
So we want to give a high
weight in our match score for
rare terms like arachnocentric.
On the other hand, frequent terms
are less informative than rare terms.
So, consider a term that is frequent in
the collection like high, increase, line.
Which might occur in lots of documents.
Well, a document containing such a term
is more likely to be relevant than
a document that doesn't if the query
contained one of those terms and
it's not such a sure
indicator of relevance.
So, frequent terms we want
to give positive weights for
a document matching a term in the query.
But lower weights than for rare terms.
And so
the way we're going to go about doing that
is by making use of this notion
of document frequency scores.
So what exactly is that?
Well, the document frequency of a term is
the number of documents
that contain the term.
So what this means is that we're
looking at the entire collection, so
maybe the collection Is
a million documents, and
if ten documents have this word we're
saying that the document frequency is ten.
So that's just counting the number
of documents that it occurs.
We can elicit the number
of times that it occurs.
That's something I'll come back to.
So, document frequency is an inverse
measure of informativeness of the term.
And we also note that
the document frequency has
to be smaller than the number
of documents in the collection.
So putting that together, this gives us
the measure of inverse document frequency
where we start with the document frequency
and used it as the denominator and
the numerator N here is
the number of documents.
So for a word that appears in just
one document, this part will be N and
for word that appears in every document,
it's value will be 1.
So it's some value between one and N.
And so then what we do after that,
is we take the log of it.
And the log is used to dampen the effect
of inverse document frequency.
The idea again is that if you
just use the absolute score.
That'd be too strong a vector.
Now in this computation as you can
see I've used log to the base 10, and
that's very commonly used.
But actually it turns out that what
we used as the base of the log
isn't really important.
Okay, let's go to a concrete example,
where again we're going to suppose that
the size of our document
collection is 1 million documents.
So if we take an extremely rare word like
calpurnia, which let's say occurs in just
one document Well then what we're going
to be doing is we're going to be taking
one million the number of documents
divided by one and then taking
the log of that which means with that
belong to the base 10 and that would be 6.
If we take a somewhat more common word
that occurs in maybe a 100 documents,
then we're going to get the inverse
document frequency of that is 4.
And so then we can work on down for
progressively more common words and
the inverse document frequency will
count down and in particular for
the final case, we shouldn't the word that
occurred in every one of our documents.
We'll then we've got a million
divided by a million.
Which is one.
And if we take a log of that
we get the answer zero.
So the result we actually get is that
a word that occurs in every document
does have a weight of 0
according to an idf score and
has no effect on the ordering of words and
retrieval.
And that makes sense, because if it
occurs in every documents it has
no discriminatory value between
documents and gets a weight of 0.
And so what you can see with these numbers
overall though is that this inverse
document frequency weighting
will give a small multiplier to
pay more attention to words that
are rare words rather very common words.
Another thing to note here is
that IDF values aren't things
that change for each query.
That there's precisely one IDF value for
each term in the collection, and that's
going to be the same regardless of what
query you're issuing of the collection.
Okay, here's a yes,
no question for you guys.
Does the IDF have an effect on ranking for
one-term queries like this one?
The answer is no, it doesn't,
IDF has no effect on one term queries.
So for one term query,
you both have one of these terms
of N over the document frequency and
it will be worked out.
But it's going to be just a scaling factor
which syncs only one idea value for
each term will be applied
to every document and
therefore it won't affect
the ranking in any way.
You only get an effect from IDF when
you have multiple terms in a query.
So for example,
if we have the query capricious person,
well now we're in a situation where
capricious is a much rarer word.
So IDF will say pay much more
attention to documents that contain
the word capricious then to documents
that contain just the word person
in making your retrieval results.
There's another measure that
reflects the frequency of a term and
indeed you might have been
wondering why we're not using it.
And that other measure is what
information retrieval people refer to as
the collection frequency of the term.
So the collection frequency of the term
is just the total number of times it
appears in the collection
counting multiple occurrences.
So that's the measure that we've
been using in other places.
It's the measure we were using to
build unigram language models or
when we're working out spam classifiers or
something like that.
But it's not what's usually used in the
information retrieval ranking systems and
this next example can
maybe help explain why.
So here we have two words, insurance and
try, and I picked those two
words because they have virtually
equal collection frequency.
Overall they both occur somewhat more
than 10,000 times in the collection.
But let's then look at
their document frequency.
So the word, try,
occurs in 8,700 odd documents.
And that stands in contrast
to Insurance which occurs in
slightly under 4,000 documents.
And so what does that mean?
What that means is that when try occurs in
the document it tends to occur only once,
but that try is widely
distributed across documents.
On the other hand when
insurance occurs in a document,
it tends to occur several times.
It tends to occur 2-3 times.
And so what does that reflect?
It reflects the fact that
there tend to be documents
about insurance which then
mention insurance several times,
where there don't really tend
to be documents about trying.
And so what does that mean in terms
of coming up with the score for
retrieval systems with words matching.
What it seems to suggest is that
what we should be doing is giving
higher weighting to instances
of the word insurance appearing.
So if we will have some kind of,
imagine some kind of query
like try to buy insurance.
The most important word to
make sure we're finding in
our documents to match the query is
insurance and probably the second
most important word is buy and
try should be coming in third place.
Before the nearest stop word of two.
And so that's an idea that's
being correctly captured
by looking at the document frequency.
But as you can see, it's not
captured by the collection frequency
which would score, try insurance equally.
Okay, so I hope now you know what document
frequency waiting is and why people
usually use that as a retrieval ranking
score rather than collection frequency.